[Docs] Add ServiceMonitor section and make some step optional in Grafana & Promethus page (#53474)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/cluster/kubernetes/k8s-ecosystem/metrics-references.md

| `kuberay_cluster_provisioned_duration_seconds`   | Gauge | The time, in seconds, when a RayCluster's `RayClusterProvisioned` status transitions from false (or unset) to true         | `namespace`: &lt;RayCluster-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayCluster-name&gt;                                              |

### Ray Service

| Metric Name                                       | Type  | Description                                                | Labels                                                               |
|--------------------------------------------------|-------|------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `kuberay_service_info`                           | Gauge | Metadata information about RayService custom resources     | `namespace`: &lt;RayService-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayService-name&gt;                                               |

> | `kuberay_service_condition_ready`                | Gauge | RayServiceReady means users can send requests to the underlying cluster and the number of serve endpoints is greater than 0. Refer to [RayServiceReady](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/33ee6724ca2a429c77cb7ff5821ba9a3d63f7c34/ray-operator/apis/ray/v1/rayservice_types.go#L135) for more information                                           | `namespace`: &lt;RayService-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayService-name&gt;                                             |

Reviewer: Can we make the description consistent with the metrics description?

> | `kuberay_service_condition_upgrade_in_progress`  | Gauge | UpgradeInProgress means the RayService is currently performing a zero-downtime upgrade. Refer to [UpgradeInProgress](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/33ee6724ca2a429c77cb7ff5821ba9a3d63f7c34/ray-operator/apis/ray/v1/rayservice_types.go#L137) for more information                                         | `namespace`: &lt;RayService-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayService-name&gt;                                              |

Reviewer: Also here

> ### Rayjob metrics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### RayJob metrics
```
```suggestion
### Rayjob metrics
```

| Metric Name                                       | Type  | Description                                                | Labels                                                                   |
|--------------------------------------------------|-------|------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `kuberay_job_info`                               | Gauge | Metadata information about RayJob custom resources         | `namespace`: &lt;RayJob-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayJob-name&gt;                                                   |
| `kuberay_job_deployment_status`                  | Gauge | The RayJob's current deployment status                      | `namespace`: &lt;RayJob-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayJob-name&gt;<br/> `deployment_status`: &lt;New\|Initializing\|Running\|Complete\|Failed\|Suspending\|Suspended\|Retrying\|Waiting&gt;                          |

> | `kuberay_job_execution_duration_seconds`         | Gauge | Duration from when the RayJob CR’s JobDeploymentStatus transitions from Initializing to either the Retrying state or a terminal state, such as Complete or Failed. The Retrying state indicates that the CR previously failed and that spec.backoffLimit is enabled.   | `namespace`: &lt;RayJob-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayJob-name&gt;<br/> `result`: &lt;Complete\|Failed&gt;<br/> `retry_count`: &lt;count&gt; |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `kuberay_job_execution_duration_seconds`         | Gauge | Duration from when the RayJob CR’s JobDeploymentStatus transitions from Initializing to either the Retrying state or a terminal state, such as Complete or Failed. The Retrying state indicates that the CR previously failed and that spec.backoffLimit is enabled.   | `namespace`: &lt;RayJob-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayJob-name&gt;<br/> `job_deployment_status`: &lt;Complete\|Failed&gt;<br/> `retry_count`: &lt;count&gt; |
```

(kuberay-metrics-references)=

# KubeRay Metrics References

## Controller Runtime Metrics
KubeRay uses Controller Runtime to build controllers, and Controller Runtime provides some metrics by default that are aggregated in KubeRay metrics.
Controller runtime provides these metrics natively:
- Total number of reconciliations (success, error, requeue, etc.)
- Length of reconcile queue
- Reconciliation latency
- Total CPU spent time, resident, virtual memory size, file descriptor usage
- Go runtime metrics such as number of Goroutines, GC duration

For more information, refer to [metrics-reference](https://book.kubebuilder.io/reference/metrics-reference).

> ## KubeRay Custom Metrics

Author: I think KubeRay Metrics should include Controller Runtime Metrics and KubeRay Custom Metrics emphasize "custom" so we can differentiate with natively provided metrics (Controller Runtime), does it make sense to you?

> ## KubeRay Custom Metrics

Reviewer: Sure!

Starting from KubeRay 1.4.0, KubeRay introduces new metrics for KubeRay's three Custom Resources, RayCluster, RayService, and RayJob.

> You can check them by following the instruction:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can view these metrics by following the instructions below:
```

```sh

> # forward the metrics port(8080) from KubeRay operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Forward a local port to the KubeRay operator service.
```

kubectl port-forward service/kuberay-operator 8080

> # check the metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# View the metrics
```

curl localhost:8080/metrics

> # something like this should appear if you have existed RayCluster 
> # kuberay_cluster_info{name="raycluster-kuberay",namespace="default",owner_kind="None"} 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# You should see metric like this if a RayCluster already exists,  
# kuberay_cluster_info{name="raycluster-kuberay",namespace="default",owner_kind="None"} 1
```

```

> ### Ray Cluster CR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Ray Cluster
```

| Metric Name                                      | Type  | Description                                                                                                                | Labels                                                               |
|--------------------------------------------------|-------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `kuberay_cluster_info`                           | Gauge | Metadata information about RayCluster custom resources                                                                     | `namespace`: &lt;RayCluster-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayCluster-name&gt;<br/> `owner_kind`: &lt;RayJob\|RayService\|None&gt; |

> | `kuberay_cluster_condition_provisioned`          | Gauge | Describes whether all ray pods are ready for the first time, refer to [RayClusterProvisioned](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/7c6aedff5b4106281f50e87a7e9e177bf1237ec7/ray-operator/apis/ray/v1/raycluster_types.go#L214) for more information                                      | `namespace`: &lt;RayCluster-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayCluster-name&gt;<br/> `condition`: &lt;true\|false&gt;               |

Reviewer: Maybe make it consistent with the metric description?
```suggestion
| `kuberay_cluster_condition_provisioned`          | Gauge | Indicates whether the RayCluster is provisioned. Refer to [RayClusterProvisioned](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/7c6aedff5b4106281f50e87a7e9e177bf1237ec7/ray-operator/apis/ray/v1/raycluster_types.go#L214) for more information                                      | `namespace`: &lt;RayCluster-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayCluster-name&gt;<br/> `condition`: &lt;true\|false&gt;               |
```

| `kuberay_cluster_provisioned_duration_seconds`   | Gauge | The time, in seconds, when a RayCluster's `RayClusterProvisioned` status transitions from false (or unset) to true         | `namespace`: &lt;RayCluster-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayCluster-name&gt;                                              |

> ### Ray Service CR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Ray Service
```

| Metric Name                                       | Type  | Description                                                | Labels                                                               |
|--------------------------------------------------|-------|------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `kuberay_service_info`                           | Gauge | Metadata information about RayService custom resources     | `namespace`: &lt;RayService-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayService-name&gt;                                               |

> | `kuberay_service_condition_ready`                | Gauge | Shows whether RayService is in condition of [RayServiceReady](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/33ee6724ca2a429c77cb7ff5821ba9a3d63f7c34/ray-operator/apis/ray/v1/rayservice_types.go#L135)                                           | `namespace`: &lt;RayService-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayService-name&gt;                                             |

Reviewer: Also this one https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/bdfb012125c74f991bdfc06f30b9b02aa9a5cc70/ray-operator/controllers/ray/metrics/ray_service_metrics.go#L36

> | `kuberay_service_condition_upgrade_in_progress`  | Gauge | Shows whether RayService is in condition of [UpgradeInProgress](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/33ee6724ca2a429c77cb7ff5821ba9a3d63f7c34/ray-operator/apis/ray/v1/rayservice_types.go#L137)                                         | `namespace`: &lt;RayService-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayService-name&gt;                                              |

Reviewer: https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/bdfb012125c74f991bdfc06f30b9b02aa9a5cc70/ray-operator/controllers/ray/metrics/ray_service_metrics.go#L42

> ### Ray Job CR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Ray Job
```

| Metric Name                                       | Type  | Description                                                | Labels                                                                   |
|--------------------------------------------------|-------|------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `kuberay_job_info`                               | Gauge | Metadata information about RayJob custom resources         | `namespace`: &lt;RayJob-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayJob-name&gt;                                                   |

> | `kuberay_job_deployment_status`                  | Gauge | The RayJobs current deployment status                      | `namespace`: &lt;RayJob-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayJob-name&gt;<br/> `deployment_status`: &lt;New\|Initializing\|Running\|Complete\|Failed\|Suspending\|Suspended\|Retrying\|Waiting&gt;                          |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `kuberay_job_deployment_status`                  | Gauge | The RayJob's current deployment status                      | `namespace`: &lt;RayJob-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayJob-name&gt;<br/> `deployment_status`: &lt;New\|Initializing\|Running\|Complete\|Failed\|Suspending\|Suspended\|Retrying\|Waiting&gt;                          |
```

> | `kuberay_job_execution_duration_seconds`         | Gauge | Duration from RayJob CR initialization to terminal state   | `namespace`: &lt;RayJob-namespace&gt;<br/> `name`: &lt;RayJob-name&gt;<br/> `result`: &lt;Complete\|Failed&gt;<br/> `retry_count`: &lt;count&gt; |

Reviewer: https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/105e880d3ea31845dd537a9285703c6aa57430cb/ray-operator/controllers/ray/metrics/ray_job_metrics.go#L35

Reviewer: and this one
